Update publish-pypi.md with consistent usage for "test PyPI". (#224)
pyOpenSci/python-package-guide: tutorials/publish-pypi.md

In this lesson you will learn how to:

- Build your package's source (sdist) and wheel distributions

> - Setup an account on TestPyPI (the process is similar for the real PyPI)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Setup an account on TestPyPI (the process is similar for PyPI)
```

- Publish your package to TestPyPI and PyPI

You will do all of your development work in this lesson using [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/).

Once your package is on PyPI you can publish it to conda-forge (which is a channel on conda)
using [Grayskull](https://conda.github.io/grayskull/).

You will learn how to publish to conda-forge in the [next lesson](publish-conda-forge).

> :::

Reviewer: Why is the above docs section being added to the TODO? This will prevent the content from rendering. Might be a mistake.

Author: Look at the current rendered page.  The code block about hatch is spurious -- it does not belong in the visible text there.  It just appears out of nowhere, prior to the start of the meaningful text in the page.  Rather, it is part of the "todo" section, and is referred to by the "todo."

Also, if you look at the current raw text, you will see that the triple-colon markup did not match opening and closing triple-colon marks.  There was one extra, in the middle of the "todo" section, and one missing, where the end of the first "admonition" should have been (going by how that is structured in other pages, where the leading "workflow" image is not inside the "admonition").

I am guessing that @ucodery is looking at the "Preview", and seeing the visible triple-colon marks...?  Look at other unmodified pages using "Preview", and they will be visible there as well.

This brings up a more general issue.  When we work on pages on GitHub, and view the "Preview", that apparently does not run whatever markdown extensions are in use.  In particular, the rendering on GitHub Preview does not know about the triple-colon markup, so just treats it as plain text.

So...maybe we should be looking into a way to do the full rendering as part of testing.  That might mean doing things the Old Way, with folks doing command-line git on their local machines, and doing the rendering there, so as to see what the finished product will look like.  That is significantly higher friction, but if it resolves questions like this, maybe it's the right thing to do.

Author: Note the "todo" may be obsolete -- some of those may be "done".  ;-).  The relevant line in the "todo" is:

"if we go with hatch then we may want to add this to the installable code lesson"

followed by the hatch code block to add to the "installable code lesson".  That's already in, right at the top of the "Install hatch" section in the hatch page, so it looks like at least part of that "todo" is "done".

Aaaand, this brings up another issue:  Should responses to commands be shown?  And if so, how should they be formatted?  The "pipx install hatch" command in this page includes the response, where the one over in the hatch page does not.  Which is less confusing?  Is it useful for folks to know what a correct response looks like, as opposed to an error message?  There are other examples of commands, both with and without visible responses, and the formatting of the response is not consistent.  Some have "#" before the response, others don't.

Reviewer: Yes, you are right, I wasn't looking at the html rendered docs. I got confused matching up `:::` myself, but this renders great, thanks for cleaning this up. However, I don't think we need to keep CLI examples around in TODOs. The install steps as well as the 3rd bullet can be dropped entirely from the TODO as they are already addressed elsewhere.

As for github's less-than rendering, I'm not sure there is anything we can do. this guide is using MyST which is essentially a mark up transpiler. It reads fully valid markdown files, which are tagged as such in the file name, so github is doing the best it can.

As for command line output - this is a very tricky question. I can see now that we do it all sorts of ways. I'm not aware of any documentation out there that gets it "right" all of the time. Partly because ` ```bash ` might be capturing a pure bash script, or it might be copy from the terminal, which is mixing stdin, stdout, stderr. I sometimes have the same issue with Python, where I want to show the repr output as in the interactive shell. Personally I try to mark the command section of interactive code examples with `>>>` in Python and `$` in Bash, but even still I am inconsistent, even with my use of comments.

Author: I was meaning to inquire...  There are a lot of hatch commands here, that maybe could go in the hatch tutorial, if it would be useful to have that be a somewhat standalone guide to hatch, rather than setup / installation of hatch for later use in other tutorials.  Even if these do go in the hatch tutorial, it could still be useful to repeat them here, with the specific arguments that apply to publishing to TestPyPI.  I gather that the separate hatch tutorial was more recent than the use of hatch in the other tutorials.

Author: Ok, 1st and 3rd todos are removed.  A note about converting setup.py is already in the Hatch tutorial.

About command line stuff...  I was hesitating to bring this up, but...  There are a fair number of folks using Windows.  The commands may look a bit different if executed in cmd...but not always.  A fair number of tools that come in from the *x world will use forward slashes in paths, or not understand a drive letter, or require their own special syntax for that.  Others will take back slashes, but need them quoted.  The best ones know what OS they're running on, and do "when in Rome...".

Windows users could install Git Bash.  Or Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL; which allows having an entire Linux distro under Windows).  Or the classic Cygwin.  Or adapt the commands for running directly on Windows.  The easiest option is likely Git Bash.  It's not entirely friction-free, however, as Git Bash's executable path may differ from the Windows path.

I've mostly ended up modifying commands so they work on cmd, except when the documentation strongly encourages use of Git Bash.  Or when there's a canned development environment that can be run on a virtual machine.  That's what we used to do for an open-source emergency management tool I used to work on, when we participated in hackathons.  It could take the entire day to set up our environment, so instead, we prepared pre-configured virtual machine images.

The following has a good list of the options, one could just drop in a reference to this at the outset, wherever it says "we don't support Windows".  :D  :D  :D

https://itsfoss.com/run-linux-commands-in-windows/

Reviewer 2: hi all 👋 it doesn't surprise me that there are some todo's left (likely by me) in the text. And also because i don't have windows, i don't catch windows-specific issues BUT we can add tabs for commands that might look different in a windows shell if needed. i think @ucodery opening #240 is perfect. my hope is that over time as more people test these out we can refine and make sure more use cases are covered.

:::{figure-md} build-workflow-tutorial
<img src="../images/tutorials/publish-package-pypi-conda.png" alt="Graphic showing the high level packaging workflow. On the left you see a graphic with code, metadata and tests in it. Those items all go into your package. An arrow to the right takes you to a build distribution files box. Another arrow to the right takes you to a publish to PyPI box which has an arrow containing sdist and wheel that notes those files go to PyPI for hosting. From PyPI is an arrow containing sdist since you can then connect to conda-forge for an automated build that sends distributions from PyPI to conda-forge." width="700px">

You need to build your Python package in order to publish it to PyPI (or Conda). The build process organizes your code and metadata into a distribution format that can be uploaded to PyPI and subsequently downloaded and installed by users.
:::

## TestPyPI vs PyPI

> There are two repositories (online warehouses for software) associated with PyPI to which you can upload

Reviewer: maybe just drop the reference to warehouse. It's an entirely PyPI name and not generic or recognizable as a term with other package repositories.

Author: I agree that it could be dropped.  I'll take it out.  But here's why I left it in:

I was assuming that there was an attempt to avoid jargon, under the assumption that folks won't be familiar with "repository", and "warehouse" was chosen as the surrogate for repository.  There is talk elsewhere of having a glossary -- adding definitions would help familiarize readers with the terms, as they will surely encounter them in other documentation.  Even if "repository" isn't universal, it is much more common than "warehouse", for software.  Were this data, then "repository" would still likely win.  For data, terms like "warehouse" do appear, but they tend to be in product names or advertising materials, or have been assigned new, specific meanings.

(<gripe>As often happens, folks are taking normal (usually English) words, and attaching special meaning to them...like the word "lake", as in "data lake".  Then they sniff when others don't know that they have applied their own special meaning for the actual in-normal-use word.  Harumph.  Mathematicians are the prime culprits here, especially algebraicists -- "group", "ring", "field"...  At least when physicists grab normal words and repurpose them, they are making jokes, because physics has gone wild, and the physicists are well aware, hence quark properties like "strangeness" and "charm", and quantum chromodynamics, and "bra" and "ket" vectors,... I know what a "warehouse" is...it has physical stuff in it, on shelves and pallets.</gripe>)

There are some other guidelines for documentation vs. specialized terms, in addition to having a glossary, that we might use:  First is the convention to define terms on first use.  I was trying to move such definitions up to the first use within the page.  Second is to have a "conventions" section at the beginning of the document, that lists formatting and what it means, e.g. "Literal commands, to be entered at the command line, are shown in fixed-pitch fonts." and "Command options that the user should replace with their own values are shown surrounded by angle brackets.  Replace the angle brackets and the descriptive text in them with the appropriate value for your package."

I've got a list of other terms that might be appropriate for a glossary.

Reviewer: > For data, terms like "warehouse" do appear, but they tend to be in product names or advertising materials

This is exactly what has happened here. "warehouse" is the name of the software that powers pypi.org. Specifically it is the Python package (also self-published on pypi.org) that the pypi.org administrators work on for exactly this one site.

Reviewer 2: oh yikes 🤯 also repository can be confusing as my brain goes to "github repository" vs pypi repository which is a different type of "repository". i think the glossary will be great and maybe a nice activity for another sprint - pycon maybe or scipy?!

your Python package.

> 1. **[TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org):** TestPyPI is a package repository provided by PyPI that you can use for testing that your package can be uploaded correctly, and that you can use to test that your package downloads and installs correctly. This is a great place to practice and learn how to publish a package without exposing your incomplete or not fully tested package on the real PyPI service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **[TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org):** TestPyPI is a package repository provided by PyPI that you can use for testing that your package can be uploaded, downloaded, and installed correctly. This is a great place to practice and learn how to publish a package without exposing your incomplete package on the real PyPI service.
```

Author: Done -- thanks!

2. **[PyPI](https://pypi.org):** This is the live, production PyPI repository where you can officially publish your Python package, and from which users will get your package. IMPORTANT: Only publish your package to PyPI when you are ready for it to be used by others and/or confident that it will become a package that you will maintain. PyPI is not a place to practice learning how to publish a Python package.

> The steps for publishing on TestPyPI vs. real PyPI are the similar with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The steps for publishing on TestPyPI vs. PyPI are similar with the
```

Author: Done -- thanks!

### <i class="fa-solid fa-wand-magic-sparkles"></i> Congratulations - you've created your Python package distribution files <i class="fa-solid fa-wand-magic-sparkles"></i>

You've now built your Python package and created your package distribution files. The next step is to setup

> your account on test PyPI so you can publish your package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your account on TestPyPI so you can publish your package.
```

Author: Done -- thanks!

It should start with `pypi` followed by a dash and a bunch of characters.

### Upload to TestPyPI using Hatch

Once you have your token, you are ready to publish to
TestPyPI.

- Run `hatch publish -r test`

`-r` stands for repository. In this case because you are publishing to TestPyPI you will use `-r test`. Hatch will then ask for a username and credentials.

> - Add the word `__token__` for your username. This tells test PyPI that you are using a token value rather than a username.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the word `__token__` for your username. This tells TestPyPI that you are using a token value rather than a username.
```

Author: Done -- thanks!  (At one point, I lost all my edits.  Not sure quite what happened, but I may have accidentally used the browser's "back" button.)

Once your package upload is complete, you can install it from
TestPYPI. You can find the installation instructions on the TestPyPI
landing page for your newly uploaded package.

:::{figure-md} testpypi-landing-page
<img src="../images/tutorials/test-pypi-package.png" alt="A screenshot of the TestPyPI page for pyosPackage. It says pyosPackage 0.1.0 at the top with the pip install instructions below. The landing page of the package has information from the package's README file. " width="700px">

This is an example landing page for the pyosPackage that was just uploaded. Notice at the top of the page there are instructions for how to install the package from TestPyPI. You can simply copy that code and use it to install your package from TestPyPI locally.
:::

As an example, [check out our pyOpenSci pyosPackage landing page on TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org/project/pyosPackage/). Notice that
the page has information about the current package version and also
installation instructions as follows:

`pip install -i https://test.pypi.org/simple/ pyosPackage`

:::{important} Publishing to TestPyPI vs PyPI
While you can install from TestPyPI it's not recommended that you publish to

> TestPyPI as a permanent way to install your package. In fact, you cannot, because TestPyPI deletes accounts after a time. TestPyPI is a perfect place to learn how to publish your package and test the installation process. But your end goal should be to publish to PyPI once you have figured out your workflow and your package is ready to deploy.

Reviewer: > In fact, you cannot, because TestPyPI deletes accounts after a time.

Do you have a citation for this? I've never heard this and I have a TestPyPI account which I have let go fallow for a few years before but which I still have access to.

Author: It's a warning in the Python packaging guide at python.org.  I'll change it to conditional, "may delete".

https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/using-testpypi/

"The database for TestPyPI may be periodically pruned, so it is not unusual for user accounts to be deleted."

I'm guessing it is there because the PyPI maintainers want to reserve the right to clear out old stuff periodically, and to make sure TestPyPI is not being used to serve packages to users, and just as a security measure, in case packages with malware might creep in.  It may be that they rarely do this, but they want to be able to point to a warning, if they do do it, and folks complain.
